Larry is a life agent with over 25 years of experience. Throughout his career, he has gotten to know and understand quite a bit about every aspect of the life insurance industry, from sales to underwriting to claims.

Angela calls Larry to inquire about life insurance. At their meeting a few days later, Angela says she wants a policy quickly, as she is divorcing and needs a policy to address the change that this new chapter in her life brings. Her divorce settlement is in 2 days, and she wants to coverage in place by then.

She asks Larry, “Can I have this policy in 2 days?”

Larry: “Absolutely. Let me walk you through the application….”

Angela: “But I want you to fill it out and just use this information from my old policy. The information is current, and nothing has changed since I just bought it 7 months ago. Only, I’d like to list my children as beneficiaries. If you can do that and have it all ready for me in 2 days, I’ll bring all my insurance business to you.”

What should Larry do?

#### Discussion

If Larry agrees to Angela’s request, what ethical dilemmas does he face? First, Angela wants to skip the formal application process, which creates a dilemma for Larry—how can he be sure Angela’s information really is current? What has she forgotten, or what has changed, that may render her coverage inadequate or perhaps result in too much coverage?

What would you do if you were Larry? Examine the scenario against the Socratic questioning method.

### The Real Savings

Mark’s client Chelsea is 35 years old, is single, and has a young daughter and a $40,000 mortgage. Her current whole-life insurance policy has $30,000 in coverage. Should she die, her current policy would not cover her mortgage, let alone her funeral costs.

Mark has a conversation with Chelsea in which he reviews her coverage and offers options.

Mark: “You could go for this policy, which gives you $150,000 in coverage. That would leave enough money to pay off your house and funeral expenses and leave your daughter with a fund for college. The cost is about $40 more than what you pay currently, but you’re getting much more protection.”

Chelsea: “I don’t know. I like having money to put in the bank. I’d rather have that in a savings account.”

Mark: “Understood. But this plan could give you a lot more protection than you’d receive from an interest-bearing account. It’s like a savings account anyway.”

Chelsea: “So I could withdraw money whenever I need it?”

What is Mark’s next move?

#### Discussion

Upon seeing Chelsea’s confusion, Mark is facing a dilemma—Chelsea is viewing the policy as a traditional savings account. Has Mark misrepresented the facts? If so, how does he recover? If not, what should he do next?

Mark should present the policy as the intangible protection it is and help his client understand that it is not a savings account. His comparing it to a savings account initially had confused Chelsea, and it is his job to ensure she understands the limitations of putting her money in a policy.

Also, Mark should probably be asking Chelsea more questions to determine what needs are more immediate to her—savings or life insurance. He should also examine his own motives, and Chelsea’s motivation, against Nash’s checklist.

How would you respond to Chelsea? What questions helped you get to that conclusion?

### Last-Minute Request

Eli was closing up his office on a Friday afternoon when Ted the kitchen contractor came to the door. “Please,” he implored, “I need a certificate of insurance for this job I’m doing. If I don’t have it to show the client tomorrow, I’ll lose a $250,000 commercial renovation job!”

Eli, wanting to help his client, invites him in. It’s when he asks Ted questions that Eli realizes he’s not licensed to sell the type of coverage Ted needs. Eli tries calling the agent in his office who is licensed in that area, but she’s just headed off to Europe for 2 weeks. He attempts to reach the broker that agent usually deals with but gets an answering machine.

What does Eli do next?

#### Discussion

Eli cannot assume the authority to take Ted’s application. However, he may have other options. He could continue to call agents in his office in hopes that he can find someone to write the coverage. Also, he could contact the insurer via their customer service line and try getting to the underwriter that way. Another possibility is to tell Ted he can’t help him. Yet another would be to refer Ted to a competitor who could get the coverage for him in his time frame. Or he could try talking Ted into delaying his client meeting until Monday, buying Eli some time to find someone within his office to handle the task.

How would you handle it? Which answer do you gravitate toward? Now, examine that answer given Nash’s checklist. What motivated your choice?

### The Lemming Factor

During a particularly rough tornado season, Lenny was working overtime to keep up with claims from his customers. He had asked for additional help from the home office, but there was none to be had, as all agents were overrun with claims from the storm. After one grueling day at the office, Lenny stopped by a local Chamber of Commerce meeting to discuss the business community’s response to the devastation in the area.

As speaker after speaker reached the podium, they expressed both concern for their own businesses and glee for the windfall the storms were bringing to their businesses. The local hardware store had made its monthly sales targets in generators sales over a 2-day period. In a private conversation with Lenny, the store owner admitted to raising the price of the units by $20 each to “recoup his sanity.” The owner claimed it was accepted practice under supply-and-demand economics.

In fact, a number of business owners, including insurance agents, were reporting a shift in their business models to accommodate the influx and demand. A few agents discussing the situation among themselves revealed that they were able to talk more potential clients into higher insured amounts on homeowners policies, and even life policies, than they needed because “the fear was fresh.” One agent said his own commissions were up 50 percent thanks to the ability to sell that fear in the form of bigger policies. Besides, one agent adds, the region will more than likely be required to hold more insurance in the near future thanks to the increased frequency of tornadoes.

Lenny can’t believe what he’s hearing, but he can’t help thinking that it’s an easy way to increase his commissions without having to work himself into the ground to do so.

What should Lenny do?

#### Discussion

It is true that in a free market, commerce does have the ability to set prices freely. As demand grows, prices go up. In insurance, however, regulations are designed to protect the consumer. Since insurance is an intangible, complex product, it is difficult for consumers to fully understand the intricacies of a policy. Agents have a responsibility to represent the products and options that best fit the customers’ needs.

While Lenny’s peers may be justified in the end for selling their customers larger policy limits, the market has yet to change to validate their actions. Lenny’s reaction to their behavior is correct. However, what does he do with this information?

Should Lenny report these agents, some of whom are friends, for their actions? Or should he let it go, assuming that the state regulatory board will eventually find out?

How would you handle the situation? What contributed to your decision?

### Unresponsive Insurer

Dan’s client Fred filed a claim on his business property a month ago. Fred’s business was damaged to the point where Fred had to relocate his operations to a temporary location. He lost half his monthly revenue and all his walk-in business because of the relocation. Fred had provided the insurer with all the information and documented proof of the event, yet the claim remained unpaid.

Opening the mail last week, Dan saw that Fred’s claim was rejected. Again. What was a straightforward claim had become a nightmare situation, for the claims department had made an error, rejecting the claim because they said Fred’s claim fell below his deductible limit by $100,000. Twice, the claims officers had denied the claim on the same erroneous information.

Seething, Dan grabbed Fred’s file. He looked at the discrepancy closely. Then an idea came to him: What if he refiled the claim for $200,000 over the original amount? That way, the initial claim would be paid, and the claims department would approve it since the deductible was now artificially met.

What should Dan do?

#### Discussion

Dan’s client is in a real financial bind, for sure. Fred continues to lose business as a result of incompetence at the claims level. Dan wants to help his client get the settlement he’s due. However, would increasing the claim amount really be the only way?

Filing a false claim, no matter what the intentions, is a violation of state regulations. If Dan chooses that route, he could lose his license and pay penalties, not to mention serve jail time. Still, Fred has a real problem, and he’s counting on Dan to come through for him. Dan could instead report the mistake to the claims department, to the insurer, and to the state insurance department. It would further delay Fred’s claim settlement, but it would address the incompetence.

What would you do? Should you inflate the claim, report the mistake, or do nothing, hoping the claim will eventually be paid?