The law of agency governs the relationship between an agent and the companies the agent represents. Agents sell policies and provide services to clients on behalf of the insurers. They act with to the authority granted to them under contracts with insurers. Insurers are principally responsible for the actions of their agents. Insurers are expected to ensure the agent’s proper market conduct—legally and ethically—and ensure that they are licensed to sell insurance. Therefore, any act of an agent is binding on the principal.

To further explain the law of agency, one must understand the kinds of authority that are part of that agency relationship.

- Express authority
- Implied authority
- Apparent authority
- Operation of law authority
- Ratification
- Agency by operation of law

### Express Authority

Express authority, also known as express actual authority, is explicitly stated by the insurer, either orally or in writing. The agent’s express authority is usually outlined in an agency agreement or other written documents. There is usually a contractual agreement in place.

### Implied Authority

Implied authority is a form of actual authority and consists of those powers incidental and necessary to carry out a grant of express authority. When an insurer gives an agent express authority say, to bind policies, it gives the agent implied authority to perform all the tasks necessary for binding coverage, such as gathering information from clients.

### Apparent Authority

Apparent authority (also called ostensible authority) exists when a third party assumes the principal has granted authority to the agent whether or not the principal has actually done so. For example, suppose that the ABC Insurance Agency represents the XYZ Insurance Company. XYZ’s contract with the agency does not allow ABC’s agents to bind commercial auto liability insurance. Tom, an agent at ABC, binds commercial auto coverage for Bill’s Trucking Company. When Tom hands Bill a binder for the auto coverage, Bill assumes that Tom has the authority to initiate auto coverage on his behalf.

### Agency by Ratification

If an agent commits an act that is outside the scope of authority granted by the principal, the principal will be responsible for the act only if the principal ratifies the agent’s action after the fact. In the previous example, Tom acted outside the scope of his authority when he bound commercial auto coverage for Bill’s Trucking Company. If the ABC Insurance Company ratifies Tom’s action by issuing a policy on Bill’s behalf, ABC will be obligated to pay auto liability claims that Bill’s Trucking incurs during the policy period. Ratification is considered retrospective, meaning the actions are accepted at the time they were performed, not at the time at which they were accepted.

### Operation of Law

In the case of authority by “operation of law,” the right and/or liability has been created legally for the insurer, regardless of intent, because of existing laws. This comes up frequently in estate settlements, divorce, and property transfer cases. For example, a spouse is named beneficiary on one’s employer 401(k) plan. However, the spouses eventually divorce, and the employee changes the beneficiary to the children. Under the laws in many states, the ex-spouse is entitled to that portion of the 401(k) that was earned during the marriage. The wishes of the employee are superseded by the operation of law.