While the states govern most insurance-related issues, federal laws may apply to matters not addressed by state laws. These laws include the following.

- **McCarran Ferguson Act of 1945.** Exempts insurance business from federal regulation (with some exceptions), including limiting the extent that federal antitrust laws apply.
- **Sherman Antitrust Act of 1890**. Prohibits anticompetitive business activities and gives the federal government authority to investigate and deal with companies, organizations, and trusts believed to be in violation.
- **Clayton Antitrust Act of 1914.** Prohibits specific types of anti-competitive behavior, such as mergers and acquisitions that may lessen competition and certain discriminatory pricing practices.
- **Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914**. Establishes an appointed membership charged with restricting unfair trade practices of large corporations.

Other consumer laws apply to various aspects of insurance, including the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, which allows workers to keep insurance should they change or lose their jobs. More importantly, the Act has established regulations governing the use, sharing, and storage of private consumer information and health data.

The crux of the federal government’s control over insurance lies within laws that are uniform across all states. For instance, Medicare Supplement insurance or long-term care insurance comes under the purview of federal regulation. Also, the federal government provides insurance programs in cases where the insurers have traditionally been unable or unwilling to provide coverage, such as the federal flood insurance program managed by the Federal Emergency Management Agency; federal crime insurance; federal crop insurance; and the Fair Access to Insurance Requirements Plans, in which the federal government is the property insurer of last resort should coverage not be obtainable elsewhere. Once again, these laws can help guide ethical decision-making but do not absolutely define ethical behavior.