Ethical decision making is not a straightforward process. Circumstances vary, and two people may have similar values but reach very different conclusions.

Most ethical decisions fall into one or more of four categories.

- Situation-based
- Rules-based
- People-based
- Duty-based

### Situation-Based

In situation ethics, a person makes decisions based on the existing circumstances. They decide what is right or wrong in the moment, for the current situation, not according to an established set of rules. Situation ethics is the most flexible approach to decision-making, as it allows a person to act in the moment and consider the consequences of their decision.

It is a theory developed in the 1960s by Joseph Fletcher, a professor at the Episcopal Theological School in Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Fletcher developed four presuppositions that are part of any situational dilemma.

|**Exhibit 4.1**  <br>**Fletcher’s Four Presumptions in Situational Dilemmas** 8|
|---|
|1. **Pragmatism.** The course of action must be practical and must work.<br>2. **Relativism.** Each course of action is relative to the circumstances. situational ethicists try to avoid such words as “never” and “always.”<br>3. **Positivism.** Acting in the most loving way is the right thing to do.<br>4. **Personalism.** Laws are for the benefit of the people and people are more important than the laws.|

Situation ethics has some disadvantages. First, because decisions are made in the moment, it can be hard to determine their effects over a long term. Second, a person may lack adequate information to make a clear, concise decision. Third, a person may insert bias into the decision-making process by considering their desired outcome.

For example, Ralph is a beneficiary under his father’s life insurance policy. After his father dies from suicide, Ralph files a claim under the policy, telling the insurer that his father died of a heart attack. Ralph’s insurance agent (Trevor) knows that Ralph’s father committed suicide and that the policy does not cover death by suicide. However, Trevor knows that Ralph’s family is having severe financial problems and needs the insurance money. Accordingly, he says nothing to the insurer about the suicide. By abandoning his ethical standards to show compassion for Ralph, Trevor has committed fraud. He has also exposed himself and Ralph to the risk of prosecution and jail time.

### Rules-Based

The easiest option to ethical decision-making is the _rules-based_ approach. This method uses laws, regulations, and policies as a basis for making ethical decisions. With rules-based ethics, the law is absolute. While it may seem like the smartest approach, the rules-based method isn’t always the best option for decision-making because it assumes the rules are valid. Certain rules may be invalid some of the time or always. For example, Jennifer has established a rule for hiring new workers that excludes anyone is obese. Jennifer’s rule is not unlawful (because her community has no antidiscrimination laws that apply to overweight people). While her decision isn’t illegal, it is unethical because Jennifer has not considered the harm she is inflicting on the applicants she rejects. Her actions are not innocent errors in judgment but deliberate, exclusionary acts.

### People-Based

People-based ethics is the idea that putting people first is the right course of action. It focuses on the well-being of others and protecting them from harm. It is considered the Golden Rule of decision-making: do unto others as you would have them do unto you. It is the ethics of reciprocity. The idea is to maximize the benefits of one’s actions while minimizing any negative effects.

People-based ethics has an inherent flaw; namely, it ignores other variables like businesses and the environment. For example, if a company decides to institute a substantial across-the-board salary increase for the good of its employees, it may fail to consider impact of that decision on the company’s finances.

### Duty-Based

Immanuel Kant believed that morality came from a sense of duty and that ethical decisions based on duty would serve the most good to society. _Duty-based_ ethics, or deontological ethics, were first theorized by Kant, an 18th century philosopher, who felt that reason and experience combined created a more reasonable approach to solving ethical dilemmas.

While duty-based ethics may seem like a good decision-making strategy, Kant’s theory has flaws. For one thing, the theory takes an absolutist position. These are absolute rules one must follow with no exceptions. Also, this form of ethics does not consider the results of the decision.

Another pitfall of this theory is that it does not reconcile duties that conflict. For example, suppose your sister is pointing a gun at her husband, who has beaten her and threatened to kill her. You have a duty to prevent a shooting and a separate duty to protect your sister. Kantian theory doesn’t explain which duty take precedence.

In a workplace setting, employees are expected to “do their duty” and follow the ethical guidelines set forth in company policies. If an employee behaves according to the employee manual, they will act without considering whether the outcome will be beneficial in some way. They are merely fulfilling a duty to the employer.

**https://www.nytimes.com/1991/10/30/us/dr-joseph-f-fletcher-86-dies-pioneer-in-field-of-medical-ethics.html**