As one can see, there is much planning and thought involved in creating a code of ethics for an organization. Companies must take into account a variety of factors that impact operations. Aligning it all includes understanding the corporate goals, the regulatory environment that affects business, and a myriad of potential situations from management, shareholders, vendors, and employees.

The Society for Human Resource Management has developed the following guidelines for creating a company code of ethics.

|**Exhibit 6.1**  <br>**Guidelines for Writing an Ethics Code** 14|
|---|
|- Be clear about the objectives that the code is intended to accomplish.<br>- Get support and ideas for the code from all levels of the organization.<br>- Be aware of the latest developments in the laws and regulations that affect your industry.<br>- Write as simply and clearly as possible. Avoid legal jargon and empty generalizations.<br>- Respond to real-life questions and situations.<br>- Provide resources for further information and guidance.<br>- In all its forms, make it user-friendly because ultimately a code fails if it is not used.|

As noted in the last bullet point, no ethics code is effective without the full commitment of management. Perhaps the best way for organizations to obtain that commitment is to involve management at all levels in the creation and oversight of the code. Yet where to begin is often the toughest challenge for companies.

The structure of the code of ethics itself can vary, but there are some specific guidelines that can help companies create a sounder, more useable document. Starting by understanding the company’s most pressing needs, code authors can more easily identify those elements that are essential to the success of the document and the promotion of a more ethically sound business culture.

### Elements of the Code

Writing an effective code of ethics requires that management and other stakeholders know what elements are most important to the success of the organization. For example, triple-checking all paperwork might be a lofty goal, but it’s not likely a requirement for the organization’s success. Other factors, such as adhering to safety regulations, may take precedence.

When writing a code of ethics, companies need to consider the following.

- Legal and/or regulatory obligations
- Top traits necessary for ethical success
- Top concerns within the company
- Preferred behaviors and what values can produce them
- How the company will guide employees to the right decisions
- What gray areas exist that need definition or clarification

#### Legal/Regulatory Obligations

Good ethics codes begin with understanding ethics from a legal standpoint. Companies should be considering the laws the organization needs to adhere to; how can expectations be built into the ethics code that ensures these laws are addressed? Likewise, companies should determine if there are behaviors in existence now that are violating laws. If so, organizations need to determine swift resolution along with putting rules in place that help prevent future occurrences.

Also, once there is an ethics code draft established, management needs to determine if all parts of the code draft align with legal requirements and regulations. It is also at the draft stage where companies should be looking to prioritize ethics in order of legal requirements first, with customer and operational needs being supported by these compliance needs.

#### Top Ethical Traits

A good code of ethics outlines both proper behavior and key ethical traits. For example, John’s insurance agency code of ethics cites job competency, professionalism, and swift response to customer complaints as essential for their agents to ensure the success of the agency. Harvey’s agency, which was fined recently due to compliance issues, may consider regulatory compliance uppermost in its list of top traits.

How do companies identify key traits? They should first consider the values within each job function that are critical to its proper execution. For example, a claim handler needs to properly interview claimants, file appropriate documents, and ensure all parties involved in the claim are given the information necessary to properly adjudicate the claim. The claim handler would need skills such as competence, customer service and communication, and due diligence.

#### Top Company Concerns

No ethical code is effective if it does not address the ongoing concerns or problem areas that its company faces. Ongoing behavioral, cultural, or operational issues should be ferreted out and addressed in the ethical code. Companies should ask their employees which issues concern them and how those issues have affected morale, productivity, or company reputation. For example, Norman discovered that the agents in his agency were unhappy with the way in which Norman applied the agency’s code of ethics, excluding his own behavior. They were expected to file expense reports and adhere to specific office hours, yet Norman had no sense of personal limits and came and went as he pleased.

How does one create a value system that helps correct such an uneven culture? For Norman, his option would be to redraw the lines to include himself. He could identify the behaviors that are opposite those to which his team objects; in this case, it would be fairness, honesty, and accountability. Then he could reframe the code of ethics to include that type of behavior from all members of the agency. Also, he might implement an accountability process that keeps his own behavior in check.

#### Preferred Behaviors and Values

Like Norman, companies and agents can identify those behaviors that are preferred to the negative behaviors they are hoping to replace. They can get started by using the following list of the _Six Pillars of Character_ as written by the Josephson Institute of Ethics.

|**Exhibit 6.2**  <br>**Six Pillars of Character** 15|
|---|
|1. Trustworthiness<br>    1. Honesty<br>    2. Integrity<br>    3. Reliability (Promise-keeping)<br>    4. Loyalty<br>2. Respect<br>    1. Civility, Courtesy and Decency<br>    2. Dignity and Autonomy<br>    3. Tolerance and Acceptance<br>3. Responsibility<br>    1. Accountability<br>    2. Pursuit of Excellence<br>    3. Self-Restraint<br>4. Fairness<br>    1. Process<br>    2. Impartiality<br>    3. Equity<br>5. Caring<br>6. Citizenship|

With these traits in mind, code authors can choose those that provide the greatest alignment with company requirements and goals. When crafting the code, writers should try to include examples of the expected behaviors along with the expected traits to bring more clarity to what is expected of employees.

#### Company Responsibilities

The success of the code of ethics depends strongly on how the company intends to guide employees toward making right decisions. Therefore, part of the code of ethics should include specific steps the company will take to help employees meet these guidelines both in the short term and on an ongoing basis. Also, companies need to demonstrate and practice their own commitment to an ethical culture. Some ways companies can institute ethics at the top of the organization include the following.

- Securing active support from the owner, CEO, and other executives
- Creating a board-level ethics committee
- Appointing an ethics management team
- Making ethics a discussion item in board meetings and company meetings

The best approach a company can take to ensure that all employees embrace an ethical culture is to create ethical accountability. Just as employees are accountable for finishing projects, meeting sales projections, or delivering customer service, they can own the ethics process in their own positions.

For agents, a way to address ethics is to build into the sales and service process ways in which to measure decisions made against company ethical standards, regulatory standards, and customer service standards. Agents can discuss such decisions weekly with managers or coworkers to assess their impact on customers and the company’s overall business operations.

Another way companies can engage employees in ethics is by offering ongoing training or refresher sessions. Each employee or independent contractor should understand the basic ethical requirements of their positions and the processes in place to help them reach the right decision. Companies should position themselves as support systems, establishing a communication process that allows agents and other employees to bring ethical dilemmas to their attention for both discussion and resolution purposes.

One facet of an ethics program is an open atmosphere that allows for forgiveness and leniency. Often, a more conciliatory approach can help companies and their employees come to swifter, more satisfying resolutions. Employees will be more inclined to point out potential ethical violations or dilemmas if they know there will be an effort to solve the problem instead of assigning blame.

#### Gray Areas

There will be times when agents and their companies will face ethical questions and issues that have no clear answer. In those cases, there should be a process in place by which agents and companies work together to solve such dilemmas and create ongoing policies that clarify each situation for future reference. For example, Greg’s client Michelle has filed a claim on her deceased husband’s health insurance plan, claiming that expenses for his hospice care should have been covered under his insurance plan. The insurance company initially denied the claim because details of the husband’s hospice care were inadvertently omitted when the claim was filed.

In this situation, Greg worked with the insurer and its claims department to ensure the hospice expenses would be covered. From there, the company and Greg’s office will log the details of the claim and the outcome. If Greg’s office holds regular ethics update meetings, Greg can share this information so that other agents facing the same situation can use it as a guideline for their own decision-making process.

### Reporting Requirements

Even if an agency or insurer promotes a culture of forgiveness or leniency when reporting, there should be a process in place by which agents can report issues and management can work to resolve them. The process should include the following checkpoints.

- A liaison for all ethics-related reports
- An easy, multipronged process by which violations can be reported
- A written reporting process distributed to all employees
- A formal inquiry process
- An identified investigator or investigative team
- A notification schedule
- Questions and follow-up
- Decision-making body and resolution steps

The ethics program should identify the person responsible for its oversight. That person will be in charge of ensuring that all facets of the ethics process and program are adhered to and carried out in the manner specified. Also, the ethics manager should take charge of regular reviews and updates of the ethics process, the code of ethics, any code of conduct, and employee manuals. Ethics processes should be considered living documents that change and evolve as companies do.

---

14 The Society for Human Resource Management, 2001.

15 The Josephson Institute of Ethics, 2013.