Companies that are able to build a culture of compliance and ethical values manage to synchronize efforts at running the business with the policies and procedures set forth. Aligning practices and behaviors with the company values is work, but the result is a cohesive, successful team that understands clearly the goals and operating expectations of the company.

Ethical organizations typically share similar characteristics, which include the following.

- Accountability at all levels
- Ethical leadership
- Customer focus
- Ethics-driven decision-making
- Value-based education/training
- Transparency

### Accountability

From the CEO to the mail clerk, everyone in an organization must be accountable for their actions and decisions. That means a shift must be made in measuring performance. Ethical decision-making now becomes a large part of the measurement of employee success. The successful company is one that holds “zero tolerance for conscious values violations.”9

### Ethical Leadership

Ethical structures, value statements, and codes of conduct mean nothing if they do not apply to the organization’s leaders. Leaders especially should be exhibiting a bias toward ethical decision-making in all business dealings. It means tough choices: choosing ethical responsibility over profit or business gains. Without a management structure that prioritizes ethics, employees will have no basis from which to make ethical decisions and no incentive to do so. Management must lead by example.

### Customer Focus

Some companies attempt to drive ethical practices through a customer-centric model. They believe that if they focus on the customer, they will make the right choices. In part, that is true. Making decisions with the customer in mind does aid one in coming to sound conclusions that best serve the customer and, in return, the company as a whole. It underscores the ethical obligations a company has to the public, and each decision impacts employees, shareholders, and management as well as customers.

However, customer-focused business ethics are not by themselves a guarantee that businesses will have an ethically sound practice. It is the combination of thoughtful leadership, internal and external accountability, training, sound decision-making, and customer focus that creates the most impactful ethical environment.

### Ethics-Driven Decision-Making

It’s one thing to create value statements, mission statements, and codes of ethics. It’s entirely another thing to live by them. Many businesses do have the elements in place to form the ethical organization. What may be missing in some businesses is the implementation. In an ethically driven company, each decision is checked against the company’s value statement and/or code of conduct before they are carried out.

### Value-Based Education and Training

To ensure their employees make ethical decisions, companies must train their entire staff (including management) how to apply the company’s values and code of conduct to their daily business practices and interactions.

### Transparency

Companies should operate under the highest level of transparency, not only in financial statements and reports but in every facet of business. In some cases, companies are expected to follow laws passed in response to scandalous corporate behavior.

#### Sarbanes-Oxley: Implementing Transparency

Financial scandals in the 1990s related to a lack of transparency prompted US legislators to enact laws mandating transparency with regard to financial records. One such law is the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (SOX). The act places strict standards on public company boards, management, and their public accounting firms. SOX requires CEOs and chief financial officers to personally certify that the company’s financial statements meet the US Securities and Exchange Commission’s disclosure requirements. It also requires corporate officers to take responsibility for all internal controls and to report in “real time” material changes in their financial condition or operations. The act imposes criminal penalties for a company that “knowingly alters, destroys, mutilates, conceals, covers up, falsifies, or makes a false entry in any record, document, or tangible object”10 in investigations.

Walk the Talk Company, 2010.

10 Cornell University Law School n.d.