An ethical culture can benefit a company in various ways, including the following.

- Increased teamwork and productivity
- Stronger management standards
- Improved compliance
- Better public reputation
- Decreased illegal activity
- Increased cost savings overall

### Teamwork and Productivity

When employees know what’s expected of them and what the company’s values are, they can conduct business in a way that helps the company meet its objectives. When employees know that open dialogue and integrity are company values, they will be motivated and inspired to perform better.

### Stronger Management Standards

When senior management fails to actively maintain the company’s ethics program, the program is bound to fail. When management believes in the code and actively supports it, standards improve across the board. Decisions become easier, and companies avoid unnecessary difficulties that arise from not following a strict code of ethics.

### Improved Compliance

By building ethical codes of conduct that adhere to the letter of the law, companies can greatly reduce incidents of noncompliance, including any associated fines or penalties. For example, the company that has a strong sexual harassment policy and procedure for handling such claims can greatly reduce its exposure to lawsuit from harassment victims.

### Better Public Reputation

People love a company with a heart. Companies with strong ethical standards that are clearly visible in how they do business attract positive attention. Customers want to be part of that culture and want to experience the positivity firsthand.

Even more benefits can be realized from a strong ethical culture. A business with a good reputation attracts shareholders, and it attracts a more talented workforce. How a company presents itself to the public and conducts itself every day can have a profound impact on public opinion.

### Decreased Illegal Activity

Employees who are trained in ethical practices and who have accountability for their actions are less likely to do harm to their employers. While a strong ethical environment will not remove all illegal activity from a company, it will help business greatly reduce the likelihood of an employee committing a criminal act. For example, an employee asked by a competitor to share confidential information that could give that competitor an economic advantage is less likely to do so if he feels an ethical connection to his company.

### Increased Cost Savings

Inspired employees are loyal employees. Ethical cultures with transparency from the top down breed job satisfaction and employee retention. That saves money in terms of rehiring and retraining. Also, cost savings can be realized with the increased sales and customer retention. When customers trust a company, they stay with a company.

Another cost savings comes from a reduction in theft or other illegal activities. Satisfied employees who feel heard are much less likely to steal from their employers. Also, operating from an ethical business mindset can help a company maintain relationships with key suppliers, which can lower the chance of losing a supplier or seeing unexpected cost hikes.