Ethical insurance agents typically display the following traits.

- Competence
- Due diligence
- Fiduciary responsibility
- Full disclosure
- Industry knowledge and commitment to ongoing education
- Regulatory compliance

### Competence

Virtually any insurance association code of conduct includes the word “competent” as one of the principal tenets. Agents become competent through experience, training, and a commitment to excellence. They must understand the products they’re selling and be able to explain them clearly and accurately to potential policyholders. Misstatements about products, premiums, and the amount of coverage a policyholder needs, even if done without ill intention, can be viewed by authorities as unethical or illegal actions. An agent who lacks the appropriate level of competence can harm a customer.

For example, Shelli is seeking property insurance for her small business. Because Shelli rents her business premises, Rob, her agent, believes she does not need flood insurance, even though her facility is situated near a river, as he assumes her landlord has purchased the coverage. He communicates his assumptions to Shelli and advises her to buy a basic business owners policy only.

Unfortunately, Shelli’s lease states that she is responsible for insuring her premises against all perils, including flood. Should the river flood, Shelli could lose her entire business due to Rob’s failure to read her lease.

#### Ethical Competency

In addition to technical knowledge and communication skills, agents need ethical competence. Ethical competency is the ability to make conscious decisions and take responsible actions within a given situation, while considering legal, social, economic, and ecological consequences. It also involves being able to distinguish between right and wrong, and acting accordingly.11 Agents can come to ethically competent decisions by removing ego or by understanding that rules are not always absolute. In some cases, rules can indeed be followed while also accommodating the client’s needs. For example, Maria is filing a claim on her father’s long-term care policy. Her father suffers from early-stage Alzheimer’s disease and is unable to file the claim himself. Because her father has not named her as a power of attorney, Maria cannot legally make the claim for him. Scott, her father’s agent, visits Maria’s father in his home and gets his oral permission to file the claim. Scott contacts the insurer, explains the situation, and together, they get the claim filed on Maria’s father’s behalf. Scott has obeyed the law while responding to the circumstances. He has behaved responsibly, distinguished between right and wrong, and acted in the best interest of his client.

### Due Diligence

Due diligence is the exercise of proper care and attention to a business transaction. This term is commonly used to refer to the review of financial and legal documents in a merger or acquisition but is equally applicable to virtually any decision-making process, including whether to insure or self-insure, whether to form a captive insurance company, and a host of other risk management decisions. Agents must exercise due diligence when choosing insurance companies to represent. They should evaluate each insurer’s financial performance, product offerings, claims-paying history, reputation, and client satisfaction. Agents should also review the insurers’ code of ethics or code of conduct to ensure it is consistent with the agent’s personal code. Sources of information on insurers include the following.

- Rating companies (Standard and Poor’s, Moody’s, A.M. Best, etc.)
- J.D. Power’s satisfaction ratings
- Company financial reports
- Word of mouth from other agents
- News reports
- State insurance departments

### Fiduciary Responsibility

The term _fiduciary_ means a person who manages money or property for someone else. Examples are attorneys and pension fund managers. A fiduciary is legally obligated to act in the interest of their client, not for their own benefit.12 Some states require insurance agents to act in the financial best interests of their clients. That creates a fiduciary relationship between the agent and the insured. Agents must not put their own financial interests above those of their clients. In fact, state insurance regulations prohibit such behavior and set forth punishments that might include fines, license revocation, and even prison time.

An agent’s fiduciary responsibility to clients comes in three areas: sales, proper handling of funds, and claim payments. In a sales setting, an agent is required to make appropriate recommendations based on a client’s needs. This is an area where violations usually occur. Agent commission is tied to the dollar amount of the insurance product, and the temptation is often great to oversell a client on coverage. However, most agents understand that the needs of a client should trump any desire for higher commission. Plus, regulations and strict codes of conduct often serve as enough deterrent to ward off such temptations.

When paying claims, agents and insurers are required by their state’s laws to pay claims promptly and without undue delay. In some cases, claims are delayed due to investigation, lack of adequate evidence, or questions regarding the claim. However, most claims can be paid in a timely manner.

### Full Disclosure

Agents are required to fully disclose the main features of the insurance products they sell so clients can make informed decisions. **_Some states_** also require insurance agents and brokers to inform clients of **_the commissions_** they earn on the sale of their policy. **_Even if_** it’s not required by law, a statement of commissions the agent is earning can help build trust between the client and the agent.

### Industry Knowledge/Ongoing Educational Commitment

Every state insurance commission requires agents to complete a certain number of hours of continuing education study in order to renew and maintain licensure. Each state’s requirement is different, so agents must be proactive and know what those requirements are.

Also, agents should be aware of their own needs when it comes to learning. New products and new regulations come into the marketplace frequently. Agents should be aware of the changes within the market and seek out opportunities to learn as much as possible about these changes.

Some of the ways in which agents can learn more about their industry or about skills they don’t currently possess include the following.

- Webinars
- Podcasts
- Seminars and workshops
- Conferences and trade shows
- Industry publications and journals
- College courses
- Industry-sponsored educational programs

### Regulatory Compliance

Probably the more daunting task for the agent is maintaining regulatory compliance. Laws are in constant flux, and agents may have difficulty keeping up with changes. Most states notify agents, agencies, and insurers when laws change. However, the onus is on the agent to keep abreast of regulatory changes or additions. Social media channels and subscription email newsletters are available to agents offering additional means of tracking the numerous regulatory changes taking place in the market. Most insurers will provide compliance training for agents representing them. Also, insurers expect agents to follow their compliance guidelines, both from an internal and external perspective; agents are expected to follow company regulations as well as local, state, and federal regulations.

---

[](https://www.webce.com/TestSmart/Lesson.aspx?_=L072Mr7pcbskNasHdKsPsVs%24L2c5NX7LcrN3ta4PMaJTJ2Zn3mp9JGJZZKpWIc4Jc8M1tGdKsL7oaPsqZDZ5YM5p6r63Nq6PM*M%24a9cq3DZn8K&H=www#footnote-TS24)