Because ethics and morality are subjective areas, how one applies ethics in any given situation will vary greatly. Laws and regulations set the minimum ethical standards, but ethics entails much more than simply following the law. The following examples help illustrate the complexities that surround ethical decision-making in a competitive, commissioned environment.

### The Lifer

George, a life insurance agent, is going through a rough patch. He is divorcing, his two children are in college, and he is looking at a divorce settlement that will cost $100,000 to finalize. Also, the $30,000 tuition payment for his children’s college is due in 3 months. When he meets with Harry and Miriam to sell them life insurance, he recommends a policy with a $500,000 death benefit. Harry and Miriam are comfortable financially, have no outstanding debts, and have already purchased long-term care insurance. To generate extra commission for himself, George tells them they need a high death benefit because the government will take a large portion of their death benefit for taxes.

They agree and write him a check for the first premium. Harry instructs George to wait 3 weeks before filing the application to have time to think about their coverage. George agrees and then puts their money in his personal account. When he files their application 3 weeks later, he calls them and tells them they are now covered, and they should send him the second month’s premium. George uses the interest on the initial premium payment to help pay down his children’s college tuition.

#### The Problems

George has done a number of things wrong. First, George has determined that selling them $500,000 worth of coverage would net him a larger commission, so he has not acted with utmost faith toward his clients.

Second, George has lied about the taxes. George knows that the government will not tax life insurance, but he lied to his clients, breaching several ethical codes as well as federal and state laws.

Third, George has exceeded the authority afforded to him by the insurer. Agents are not authorized to bind coverage. By telling Harry and Miriam that they have coverage, he has overstepped his authority and misled his clients.

Finally, George has acted fraudulently by placing the couple’s initial premium—and subsequent premiums—in his personal account. He has breached state law, his duties to the insurer, and the rules of ethics.

### The Lone Wolf

Dennis has been a property-casualty insurance agent for 30 years. Recently, he and his new boss at the agency got into an argument. In a heated moment, Dennis yelled “I quit!” and stormed out of the office. Three weeks later, his client Sally called him on his cell phone, asking him to review her homeowners policy. Sally had just completed an addition to the house that increased the size of the home by 1,000 square feet.

Dennis went to Sally’s home, took measurements, and asked about other changes she had made. He drew up paperwork, had Sally sign it, and sent the application off to the insurer with Sally’s premium check.

Within a week, Dennis’s former employer sued him for stealing customers.

#### The Problems

Was Dennis at fault for stealing a client who came to him? Possibly, if he has signed an agreement with the agency to surrender all contacts upon leaving the company. However, the larger issue could be that Dennis is no longer authorized to work for the insurer since he has severed his relationship with the agency, which is an exclusive agent for the insurer. Dennis did not have express authority to act on behalf of the insurer, nor was there any implied authority since the insurer was unaware that he was still selling their product.

However, Dennis may be able to gain an agency by ratification relationship with the insurer if it accepts Sally’s application. If the insurer agrees to the coverage, Dennis has not committed any wrong in the insurer’s eyes. He still has the matter of his former employer’s lawsuit, but he is exonerated from any wrongdoing in the sale of the policy the moment the insurer accepts the application.

### The Disaster Plan

Carly is an agent with XYZ Insurance Group, located in Tampa. Recently, the area was hit hard by a strong hurricane, wiping out not only XYZ’s offices but also the homes of hundreds of XYZ clients. Most of the area was evacuated, and XYZ agents were put on alert to handle client calls from their cell phones.

A week after the storm, Carly received a call from Drew, who was a client of another agent in the Tampa area, but not with XYZ. Drew was unable to reach his agent, Phil, or any of the other agents in his office. Drew contacted Carly after seeing her name in a newspaper ad and asked Carly to file his property claim. He and his wife had lost their home, and their funds were running low. They needed to file a claim quickly. What should Carly do?

#### The Problem

Carly has several options. Instead of filing a claim for Drew, she can contact his insurer, explain the situation, and secure its commitment to help Drew. Also, she could set up a conference call between Drew and his insurer to ensure that the claim is received by his insurer directly from Drew.

Could she file the claim for him? That would depend. Is Carly an agent for Drew’s insurer? Would Drew’s insurer accept a claim made by a third party? What responsibility does Carly have to a client of another insurer to help initiate the claims process?

As this case demonstrates, ethical decisions must be adapted to the circumstances. In Carly’s case, the problem is unique. When deciding what to do, Carly must consider her legal and ethical obligations to Drew’s agent and his insurer. She must make a concerted effort communicate with them and keep them informed.