To make ethical business decisions, agents must know what standards they should follow and where their obligations lie. Agents have ethical obligations to all of the following.

- The public
- The companies they represent
- Other agents
- Clients

### The Public

When interacting with the public, agents have a responsibility to be honest, fair, and respectful and to demonstrate integrity and care. Agents should honor the public trust by complying with all state regulatory standards. They have a duty to further the public’s knowledge of the insurance industry and to contribute to the public good by actively taking part in civic, charitable, and philanthropic activities.

### The Companies Represented

Agents are expected to accurately and honorably represent the products and services of the companies they represent. To achieve that goal, agents should communicate regularly with the insurers to foster collaboration and to ensure the company’s expectations are being met. Agents have an ethical duty to represent insurers’ products and services in a manner that is fair, furthers the companies’ interests, and maintain their reputations.

Also, companies expect agents and agencies to practice good corporate governance. Agents should abide by all codes of conduct set forth by the agency and, lacking such codes, should work toward creating and helping maintain sound business practices.

### Other Agents

As colleagues within an industry, agents are expected to maintain positive relations with other insurance agents. Despite being business competitors in many instances, agents are all part of the same industry and want the same things for their clients and their insurance companies. Therefore, agents should work collaboratively to encourage all to comply with the law and insurance industry standards.

Agents also have a fiduciary responsibility to their insurers; agents in many states work under the “contract of agency” arrangement, which creates the fiduciary relationship. Agents must act in the best interests of the insurer and must account for premiums collected.

### Clients

Clients deserve accurate, complete information from insurance agents. Agents must act in the interest of their clients and strive to give them the most current factual information to help them in their decision-making process. Agents are expected to provide appropriate product recommendations and guidance to clients. Also, agents must service their clients’ policies diligently and clearly communicate important information or policy changes promptly.

Likewise, agents must maintain proper education and licensing in order to best serve them. That means more than simply taking required courses; agents must be well-versed in the changes and nuances of the insurance industry and the products the agents represent. Moreover, agents must strive to attain the most accurate, complete information on clients in order to adequately provide the best service and most appropriate products.

One other consideration is expected of the agent: privacy. Clients must feel that any information shared with the agent will not only remain private but will be handled with the utmost care to ensure privacy. Data protection measures should be adequate, and agents must not share confidential information with other agents or clients.