_John helped his client and friend Terry obtain property coverage for her home. A week after Terry’s policy had been approved, she called John in desperation. She had failed to tell John that she operated a business out of her home, and now one of her clients was talking about suing her. She asked John if there was any way he could get her coverage so that she didn’t lose her home. John, seeing the dilemma his friend was in, submitted a business rider to the broker on Terry’s behalf in hopes that Terry would be able to make a claim on this policy and save both her house and her business._

Clearly, there are several things wrong with this scenario. First, John should have performed the due diligence necessary to understand the complete picture of Terry’s insurance needs. One of the first questions he asked her should have been if she operated a business from home. Secondly, his attempt to obtain coverage for Terry knowing there was a pending lawsuit (but not mentioning it on her application) was defrauding his insurer. Thirdly, any claim Terry would make on the policy would constitute fraud against the insurer because Terry failed to mention the pending suit in her application. Also, Terry may have been grateful to John for his help, but her request to conceal the pending claim from the insurer qualifies as insurance fraud.

While John’s behavior is clearly unethical, other dishonest acts may be less obvious. Agents can run afoul of ethics and corporate policies when they are doing any of the following.

- Interacting with clients
- Doing business with insurers
- Soliciting new client prospects
- Dealing with other agents

### Ethics and Clients

Many of today’s breaches in ethical behavior derive from interactions with clients. An insurance contract is an agreement based on “utmost good faith” between the policyholder and the insurer. Both parties are expected behave honestly and disclose all relevant facts. Agents act on behalf of the insurers they represent. Therefore, agents must follow the terms of the insurance contract and agents cannot override it. Also, agents are expected to deliver timely, accurate service to clients. That includes filing applications, payments, and claims promptly.

Agents must also protect client privacy by securing documents and personal information stored on computer hard drives. Agents must refrain from discussing client business with other agents, clients, or the general public.

Agents are also expected to cooperate and collaborate with other vendors in order to facilitate coverage, claims handling, or any other services owed to the client.

### Agents and Companies Represented

Independent agent are obligated to accurately describe the products and services offered by the insurers they represent. Insurers also expect agents to practice good corporate governance so as not to harm the reputation of the insurer. Finally, agents should create and maintain open lines of communications with insurers in order to best service the policyholder’s needs.

Agents also have a duty to provide accurate and timely information insurers need to make underwriting, claims, or other types of decisions. They must notify insurers of any potential problems or omissions they become aware of.

### Agents and Other Agents

While agents compete with each other, they must treat each other ethically. For instance, the Independent Insurance Agents & Brokers of America, Inc. (IIABA) Code of Ethics requires agents maintain friendly relations with other agencies in their community and to compete with them on an honorable and fair basis. The code bars agents from making false statements or misrepresentations by omission of facts, inference, or subterfuge. In other words, agents cannot distribute advertising or marketing materials that demean or spread false information about another agent or agency.

For example, suppose that insurance agent Bob sells identity theft protection endorsements as part of the homeowners policy. Bob publishes an advertisement stating that the product he sells is far superior to the identity theft endorsement sold by insurance agent Beth, who works in an agency across town. In reality, the endorsements Bob and Beth sell are identical, as both agents represent the same insurer. By making a false statement in his ad, Bob has committed an ethics violation.