Sometimes ethical missteps go beyond simply questionable behavior. Fraud, according to the _Merriam-Webster Dictionary_, is “an intentional perversion of the truth with the intent to deceive” or “an act of deceiving or misrepresenting.” Fraud can be broken down into two distinct areas: hard and soft.

### Hard Fraud

Hard fraud is the act of inventing or deliberating creating a loss. Most acts of hard fraud are committed by insureds, but agents sometimes participate. For example, Jim wants to replace his old warehouse with a new building but saving enough money will take years. He decides to speed up the process by setting fire to the warehouse and then submitting a property damage claim to his property insurer. Jim’s insurance agent, Frank, knows that Jim has committed arson but says nothing to Jim’s insurer because he doesn’t want to lose a client.

Other examples of hard fraud are as follows.

- Susan, an insurance agent, stages an auto accident and then has a coconspirator (her office manager) tell police the other driver was at fault. She sues the other driver for a fake back injury, and she shares the proceeds of the claim with the office manager.
- Bob and his insurance agent concoct a scheme in which Bob files a workers compensation claim for an injury that never occurred. Bob collects disability payments and shares them with the agent.
- Jill, an insurance agent, injures her knee in an accident at her home. Two days later, she pretends to slip and fall in a grocery store and then sues the store for her knee injury.
- Mike conspires with his unscrupulous insurance agent, Tim, to file a fake theft claim under his auto policy. Tim “steals” the Mike’s pricey new vehicle, Mike reports the “theft” to his insurer, and the two men share the proceeds of the claim.

### Soft Fraud

Soft fraud is more common and more subtle than hard fraud. A person commits soft fraud when they exaggerate elements of a legitimate claim to get a bigger payout or mischaracterize their risks to get a lower insurance rate. Like hard fraud, soft fraud is intentional, but it lacks the preplanning aspect of hard fraud. For example, Sue has lost her watch. When she files the claim, she tells Martha, her agent, that the watch can be replaced for $500, but she thinks it’s worth $1,500 because her grandmother gave it to her, and it has sentimental value. Martha sympathizes with Sue and files a claim on her behalf for $1,500. Both Sue and Martha have just committed soft fraud.

Soft fraud is the “white lie” concept of withholding important information or embellishing facts in order to financially benefit. It is also the most common form of insurance fraud and the most difficult to detect. Whether the fraud is planned or the result of an opportunity, it is against the law and in direct violation of all corporate, association, and legal ethical standards. Also, it is a direct violation of the regulatory requirements set by the industry and by each state’s insurance authority.