A chief area of concern for agents is the commissioned sale. Insurance sales are commission-based transactions. Because agents receive a payment based on the sales price of the product they sell, consumers may be unwilling to trust the insurance agent’s recommendations. Some may believe the agent has an incentive to sell the consumer more coverage than they need.

While unscrupulous agents may sell their clients more coverage than they require in order to receive a higher commission, honest agents focus on their clients’ needs rather than their own. Agents are expected to recommend those products and services that best fit the client. Agents must work hard to build and maintain a trust relationship with their clients.

Here’s an example of an agent who prioritized her needs rather than her client’s. Susan met with Stan to sell him a property policy to cover his facilities located in her state. The appropriate amount of coverage for Stan’s properties was $2.1 million. However, Susan had just emptied her bank account to purchase a new car for her daughter. She needed money, so she recommended that Stan purchase $5 million in coverage “for appreciation purposes.”

Other ways in which commissions can cause problems for agents include the following.

- Unnecessary policy replacement
- Products with higher commission structures
- Insurer steering
- Windowing
- Scare tactics
- Discrimination/redlining
- Falsified applications

### Unnecessary Policy Replacement

It is unethical for an agent to replace a client’s insurance policy solely for the purpose of earning a commission on a new policy. If the new policy contains the same or inferior coverage as the previous policy, and the client doesn’t switch insurers, the agent has engaged in “churning.” If the client changes insurers and the new policy is equivalent or inferior to the original policy, the agent has engaged in “twisting.” Both churning and twisting are unethical because the agent is acting in their own interest rather than the client’s. Also, some agents exaggerate or make false statements regarding the original policy and the need to switch. Twisting and churning are prohibited by law in most states, and agents who commit such acts may face license revocation and possibly a fine.

### Higher Commissioned Products

Like selling a client a product he does not need, the selling of higher commissioned products in lieu of a product that may fit better is also a breach of ethics. The truth is that the commission structures set for these products by insurance companies often tempt agents to behave unethically. Because commissions vary from product to product, the temptation is to sell only those products that offer the highest commission rates, which may not be the most appropriate product for the client.

### Steering

In the automotive insurance world, steering means to direct or influence policyholders to use only certain repair shops. However, steering is expanding as a problem within the insurer world. Because of the commission structure differences mentioned previously, agents are finding themselves in trouble for funneling business to a particular insurance company in exchange for payments from the company. It was one of the charges that then-New York Attorney General Elliott Spitzer brought against insurance companies as he investigated corruption within some of the major insurance and brokerage houses.

Agents were also put under the microscope when a Consumer Federation of America study found that home and auto insurers were paying high contingent commissions, thus enticing agents to steer business toward those companies. The policies with these higher contingent commissions were reported to have lower levels of claims, thus saving insurers money.6

### Windowing

Suppose Steve is arranging liability insurance for a new client, Tim. Tim has just left Steve’s office, and unfortunately, he forgot to sign a check, an application, or a form Steve needs to submit to the insurer. Steve has promised to file the application that day, but it’s already 4:30 p.m. He holds the unsigned document up to a window, with Tim’s signature on another document placed behind it, and traces the signature. Steve has committed _windowing_, a type of forgery. Windowing is illegal, even if the client intended to sign the document.

### Scare Tactics

Amy is buying life insurance from Sloan. Amy has determined that the amount she needs to cover her expenses and give her beneficiaries extra money is $250,000. Sloan, however, believes he can get Amy to agree to a higher amount, which will generate a higher premium and a bigger commission for him, so he tells Amy that after her death, the courts will take half of her money, and her dollar amount will be reduced by half. He suggests she double her coverage to $500,000, even though he knows her current expenses include a mortgage that is nearly paid off. Sloan is using scare tactics to secure the higher commission with little regard for what Amy’s true needs are.

Insurance is an intangible, unseen product. In emotionally charged situations, such as in life insurance or long-term care insurance decision-making, it’s difficult to quantify the cost of human life. With any other insurance, there is usually a clear cost of repair/replacement/recovery. Not so with coverage that touches on health and life. For that reason, agents should be careful not to cross the line from needs selling to emotional manipulation. One way is to justify recommendations with good reasons based on the person’s income, situation, and current circumstances.

### Discrimination/Redlining

Any practice that intentionally excludes or penalizes a customer based on ethnicity, culture, age, or gender is discrimination. Agents are prohibited from discriminating against any customer based on those factors. When a customer is denied coverage or charged more for the same coverage than others with the same exposures, it is known as _redlining_.

In some cases, any one of these factors could play into the rate that a customer would pay, and it could adversely affect the price or the level of coverage.

### Falsified Applications

Most agents are aware that falsifying policyholder applications is unethical and illegal. State laws prohibit agents or consumers from making false statements, omitting important details, or otherwise misrepresenting information contained on an insurance application for financial gain or their own benefit. For example, Barb, a life insurance agent, is having financial problems. To make some extra money, she creates some false identities and submits applications to the insurer on behalf of her “clients.” She collects the commission on the new policies and then cancels them. When the insurer realizes what Barb has done, it reports her to the state insurance authority, which files fraud charges against Barb.

6 **https://www.wsj.com/articles/SB110782537690648450**