Agents walk a fine line when it comes to how they are able to attract business. When advertising or marketing to clients, agents must be especially careful to state only those things that are true and accurate. That includes statements about themselves or the competition.

### False/Misleading Advertising

If it is not true, it should not be said. While that may seem like a simple rule, agents don’t always follow it. Insurance advertising that crosses state lines is subject to the Federal Trade Commission Act. The act states that claims in advertisements must be truthful, cannot be deceptive or unfair, and must be based on evidence. Insurance advertising is also regulated by state laws. Many states have enacted laws applicable to insurance advertising. Some bar false advertising while other require ads to be accurate, truthful, and not deceptive. Some laws apply only to certain types of insurance, such as life insurance or accident and health coverages. State regulators require agents and insurers to conduct business fairly, accurately, and with the spirit of honest competition.

### Guidelines for Advertising Conduct

The advertising of insurance products and services is regulated by state laws, which vary from state to state. Also, advertising guidelines will vary based on product line. For instance, the rules applicable to advertising of health insurance products will differ from those applicable to advertising life insurance. Some insurers establish rules agents must follow when advertising the insurer’s products. Various insurance organizations provide advertising rules of conduct for agents. For example, the Independent Insurance Agents of Texas (IIAT) has created the following rules7 applicable to all forms of advertising.

- An advertisement must be truthful and not misleading either in fact or implication.
- An advertisement must identify the person or entity responsible for the advertisement, including either the full licensed name, a registered assumed name, or the agent’s Texas license number.
- The advertisement must not mislead or deceive prospective purchasers with respect to an insurer's or agent's financial condition or relative position in the insurance business.
- Testimonials used in advertising must be genuine.
- Advertisements should not unfairly disparage competitors.
- An advertisement using the word "dividend" may not imply that dividends are guaranteed or certain to occur.
- An advertisement may not directly or indirectly disparage competitors or their policies, services, or business methods.
- An advertisement may not contain untrue or misleading statements regarding another insurer’s assets, corporate structure, financial standing, age, or relative position in the insurance business.
- An advertisement may not directly or indirectly make an unfair or incomplete comparison of policies, benefits, dividends, or rates.

### Misrepresentation

Another unethical practice is misrepresentation, meaning a false or misleading statement, whether intentional or not, that influences another party’s behavior. Advertising, marketing, or even an oral sales pitch is considered misrepresentation if it contains false or misleading information is considered misrepresentation. For example, Ted and Jerry are both insurance agents and have been competing with each other for years. Jerry’s business has grown recently, and Ted is jealous. He buys a full-page advertisement in the local newspaper, showing a side-by-side comparison of his agency’s homeowners insurance and that of Jerry’s agency. Ted’s comparison shows that his product is much cheaper than Jerry’s but fails to explain that Jerry’s policy provides much broader coverage. Ted is attempting to lure new customers by misrepresenting the product he’s selling.

In the previous example, Ted intentionally misrepresented his product in a newspaper ad. Yet, acts of misrepresentation may be unintentional. Agents may make false or misleading statements due to a lack of knowledge or a misunderstanding, but ignorance is not an excuse under the law. As licensed professionals, agents are expected to have a good understanding of the products they sell.

7 **https://www.iiat.org/agency-operations/insurance-laws-regulations/insurance-laws-regulations-sales-marketing/advertising**